














































1 

 

Cross-scale interactions- Yet a challenge in vulnerability and adaptation 

analysis! 

Navarun Varma
1
 and Arabinda Mishra

2 

1
 PhD student, Dept of Policy Studies, TERI University, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi-110070, email-

nverma@teriuniversity.ac.in 

2 
Dean, Faculty of Policy and Planning, TERI University and Director, Earth Science and Climate Change 

Division, TERI, India Habitat Centre, New Delhi-110003, email- amishra@teri.res.in 

PhD working paper for Marie Curie Training Course on Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change
 

Abstract 

Vulnerability assessments performed for long term environmental changes in the global, sub 

global, national or local level regularly employ up-scaling and down-scaling of information. 

Such techniques do not always account for the interplay of the factors across the levels in 

different scales. As a result, the current studies may give an incomplete understanding of the 

dynamics of a complex adaptive system (CAS) that is responsible for shaping its vulnerability to 

a risk. This working paper is an attempt to understand the concepts of dynamic complexity in a 

CAS and reasons for complementarity and contrast when observed through different scales of 

analysis. Through a literature survey we arrive at a point that there is no single solution in 

scientific studies or management approaches for understanding and solving systemic problems in 

a CAS like socio-ecological system (SES). This leads us to look towards approaches that 

facilitate learning from different understandings of the same problem and negotiation among 

groups with different viewpoints. Finally, a case of an agro-ecosystem in the Brahmaputra basin 

in India is cited to illustrate such complexity and problems for decision making for adaptation. 

We pose three research questions- 

 How can we have an integrated model of the causal mechanisms that lead to an 

irreversible change in a multilevel SES?   

 How do we form an appropriate and acceptable strategy for adaptation when the state of a 

system changes? 

 What is the appropriate form of governance which can maintain the ecological resilience 

for adaptation during periods of environmental change? 

 

 

  

mailto:email-nverma@teriuniversity.ac.in
mailto:email-nverma@teriuniversity.ac.in


2 

 

Introduction 

The necessity for decision makers, to design adaptive strategies in tandem with emerging risks of 

long term environmental change and implementation of such decisions for purposeful adaptation 

of communities, has been felt (Adger et al., 2005). However, the quality and acceptance of such 

intervention will both depend on how well the strategies match with the scales of the problems, 

which is often perceived to be either in the level of the drivers of change of any resource or the 

resource users (Adger, 2001).  Design of such strategies is often influenced by discourses from 

different world views through which experts perceive the inherent causes of vulnerability in any 

system (Adger et al., 2001). Such world views can dictate particular scales of analysis to 

understand a problem, and also form different perspectives for policy intervention. As a result, 

the choice for a particular design process can be a political one and may not match with the real 

world problem (Stephen and Downing, 2001, Stephen, 2004). The quality and acceptance for 

implementation of such strategies remain questionable, as they lack a holistic understanding of 

the vulnerability of a system, and itself remain vulnerable to sabotage by proponents of other 

world-views (Verweij et al., 2006).  

Local communities, apart from the impacts of climate variability over their sources of livelihood 

and natural resources, face risks from multiple drivers like public policy or market shock at any 

given time. They devise their own coping mechanisms based on their perceptions of risk and 

culture which again are constrained by a plethora of socio-economic and political factors from 

higher levels. However such local responses can spread to distant locations and form sources of 

systemic change, if provided with an appropriate window of opportunity (Eakin et al., 2008, 

Gunderson and Holling, 2001). Hence, a lack or even a partial understanding of the dynamic 

complexity of a system at risk, may lead to inappropriate interventions, which may themselves 

become sources of risk.  

The success of the design and implementation of adaptive strategies will depend on the 

understanding of the causal mechanisms of inherent vulnerability of any system at risk, its 

response feedbacks and how best the strategy can match the local perceptions of the problem 

with the analytical perspectives. Thus this calls for an analysis of the implicit scale related 

problems in each step of the design process to secure the broader goals of effectiveness, 

efficiency, equity and legitimacy in decisions for adaptation to systemic changes (Adger, 2005).  

This working paper is an attempt to understand the concepts of dynamic complexity in a system 

and reasons for complementarity and contrast when observed through different scales of 

analysis. Through a literature survey we arrive at a point that there is no single solution in 

scientific studies or management approaches for understanding and solving systemic problems. 

This leads us to look towards approaches that facilitate learning from different understandings of 

the same problem and negotiation among groups with different viewpoints. Finally, a case of an 

agro-ecosystem in the Brahmaputra basin in India is cited to illustrate such complexity and 

problems for decision making for adaptation. We hypothesize that the problem calls for an 



3 

 

understanding of the linkages between risks-outcomes and responses in multiple levels of the 

system for the appropriate design of adaptive strategy. 

 

1. Research Issue 

 

In adaptation to climate change phenomenon, major research efforts have been made on guiding 

policy intervention to regions and sectors of relatively higher vulnerability and low adaptive 

capacity, cost-benefit analysis of planned adaptation options and mainstreaming adaptation into 

existing policies. The analysis of vulnerability and adaptation to the impacts of long term 

environment change phenomenon like climate change encounters a high degree of uncertainty. 

The complex relations and time delays between the drivers of change, their impacts and 

corresponding responses makes it difficult to construct any causality chain for a predicted 

outcome (Patt et al, 2005). Therefore majority of the frameworks for vulnerability assessment 

focus on a particular system of concern (which can be a natural system, social-ecological system 

or region or community, etc.), a hazard or hazards (referred to as external stressor/s to the system 

of concern), specific variables of the vulnerable system and a time period of interest (Fussel, 

2005). 

The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) defines vulnerability as- 

The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate 

change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character, 

magnitude and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed
i
, its sensitivity

ii
 and its 

adaptive capacity
iii

(IPCC, 2007).   

The definition sends a strong message that both socio-economic and natural systems are 

important subjects of analysis (Adger, 1996). But there is still a dilemma as to what should be 

the appropriate scale of analysis so as to match the scale of assessment with the scale of 

management. National and regional scale studies are cost effective and often aid into decision 

making but can mask local variations and priorities whereas local level assessments can provide 

an understanding of the coping mechanisms and perceptions of risk, but again can incur a huge 

expenditure. Besides, transferability of the local approach to another scale or different region 

incurs loss of information and suffers from the limitation of data availability (Fekette, et al, 2009, 

Stephen, 2004). In order to alleviate this scale discordance problem (Cash and Moser, 2000), 

assessment is performed for particular scales of analysis which often, are prescribed by the 

discourses followed by and needs of client/funding organizations (Stephen, 2004, Stephen and 

Downing, 2001). For example, national and regional scale assessments which rely on composite 

index construction for relative scoring of vulnerability are preferred by policy makers to identify 

target sectors or groups for intervention and/or fund allocation (Stephen, 2004). On the other 

hand, a local level case study approach is sought by community based organizations and aid 



4 

 

organizations like Red Cross which are interested with the underlying causes of vulnerability and 

process of implementation of adaptive strategies among communities (Alast et al.,2007).   

1.1 Index construction   

The aim of vulnerability index construction is to demonstrate the variance in distribution of risks 

among sectors, social groups or places. This is achieved by assigning relative vulnerability 

scores by measuring variables selected on the basis of deductive criteria and preparing indices of 

exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. The application of such an analysis is to focus 

adaptation intervention to area or social groups with highest exposure/sensitivity and least 

adaptive capacity. Such efforts evolved from a generation of impacts centric analysis for climate 

change, became more focused on decisions for adaptation rather than mitigation, as they 

considered vulnerability as an existing characteristic of any society only to be altered to varying 

degrees by impacts of a global change phenomenon (Burton et al, 2002, Obrien et al., 2004a, 

Smit and Wandel, 2006, Adger, 2006, Fussel and Klein, 2005). Although, there is an 

understanding of the dynamic property of vulnerability (Alwang et al, 2001) and there have been 

attempts to incorporate it in such an analysis through choice of appropriate indicators (Adger, 

1999, Leichenko and Obrien, 2001) and GIS mapping (Obrien et al., 2004b), the approach has 

not demonstrated any study of the linkages between risk-outcomes and responses at different 

scales which are responsible for the dynamics within a system (Eakin and Luers, 2006). It leaves 

behind the process of policy and decision making as a passive part, under the assumption that the 

vulnerability ranking within the system of analysis will direct attention to the elements of highest 

vulnerability and lowest adaptive capacity (Smit and Wandel, 2006). 

1.2 Case study approach 

In order to make the analysis of vulnerability and adaptive capacity more grounded, a case study 

approach in local level is also undertaken. Such studies try to understand the sources of risk for a 

community, the causes of vulnerability to such risks and also investigate adaptive needs by 

involving participatory techniques like participant observation and consultation with 

stakeholders rather than depending on a-priori selected list of variables. The focus of such an 

approach is to document the experience of change conditions in the system and investigate 

emergence of means of improving adaptive capacity within the decision making process of the 

system or how best it can accommodate designed adaptive strategies. For analysis of 

vulnerability to long term environmental change, current vulnerability to risks identified by the 

community is first documented, followed by assessing future vulnerability to climate risks based 

on predictions of the IPCC. The investigation also tries to gain insights on constraints and 

opportunities to long term adaptation by structuring interviews on community behavior and 

means of management of resources under changed conditions. Such an approach recognizes 

adaptation as a continuous process and the difficulty of designing any strategy for a single 

stressor like climate change. It recommends for mainstreaming or incorporating adaptive 

strategies into ongoing development policies for achieving the goal of sustainability (Young et 



5 

 

al., 2010, Smit and Wandel, 2006, Aalst et al., 2007, Ford and Smit, 2004, Keskitalo, 2004, 

Morduch and Sharma, 2002, Smith, 2000). However, a methodological challenge still remains as 

how to integrate information from secondary sources as that of climate change information 

(Aalst et al., 2007) as down-scaling of climate information may not be precise (Burton et al, 

2002) and even not possible to local levels like a village. Moreover the studies based on such 

approach are not designed to be scaled up to give information on aggregate vulnerability or 

adaptive capacity of a region or nation (Smit and Wandel, 2006).  

 

1.3 Influence of cross-scale dynamics- Yet a challenge! 

 

Up-scaling or downscaling of information is often used for index construction or for framing 

climate risks in local level studies using techniques of statistics, geographic information system 

(GIS) and/or climate modeling. As observed from ongoing research in global changes, such 

methods may not always map processes or causal relationships correctly across scales (Root and 

Schneider, 1995, Robinson, 2009, Fekette, 2009). Such a methodological challenge occurs due to 

the non-linearity in the processes, presence of heterogeneity, dominance of different processes at 

different scales, cross-scale interactions and property of emergence or self organization in any 

system (Peterson, 2000, Gibson et al., 2000). However, apart from the differential and dynamic 

character of vulnerability, there is also an understanding of the scale-dependent characteristic of 

vulnerability. The outcome of any vulnerability assessment depends on the chosen scale of 

analysis, generalizations from aggregated scores at broader scales like a region or nation may 

mask process at finer scales like a village (Birkmann, 2006, Obrien, 2004b).  Hence, multi-scale 

approaches have been attempted which tend to first find zones of high vulnerability in national, 

regional or sub-national scale and then try to “ground truth” or validate the findings by case 

studies in the local level of these high vulnerability zones (Obrien et al.,2004a, Fekette et al., 

2009). But cross-scale interactions, the influence of processes that interact between levels in 

different scales, on the dynamics of human vulnerability yet remains to be incorporated in the 

analysis (Fekete et al, 2009). A neglect of these interactions which are the key for maintenance 

of organization within any system, its disruption and emergence of a new form of organization 

(Peterson, 2000), will give an incomplete understanding of the dynamics of vulnerability and 

hence lead to inappropriate decisions for adaptation. 

The inseparability of multiple drivers of exposure and sensitivity and lack of recognition of the 

feedbacks from the adaptive responses at different spatial and temporal scale adds to the 

uncertainty in vulnerability assessments (Eakin and Luers, 2006). However, there is a growing 

theoretical and empirical understanding that the vulnerability of a system is driven by the 

dynamics of non linear interactions between human activity and processes of environmental 

change within and across scales (Holling et al., 2002, Eakin et al., 2008, Adger, 2009). The 

sustainability framework of Research and Assessment Systems for Sustainability Program 

provides us with an opportunity to analyze the dynamic linkages between sources of risk, 



6 

 

outcomes and responses in multiple scales (spatiotemporal as well as functional) by observing 

any context as a coupled human-environment system. Although it guides towards a grounded 

approach by focusing on particular place, it still recommends for incorporating local to global 

linkages both in social and environmental domains (Turner et al., 2003a, Turner et al., 2003b). 

Such an approach may not be useful to analyze present or future impacts on a system or identify 

vulnerable elements but can be helpful in illustrating the processes within and across different 

scales that shape vulnerable conditions (Eakin and Luers, 2006). However, it remains silent on 

any analytical approach to be taken for empirical study or provides no respite from the 

methodological challenges associated in incorporating cross-scale interplay. 

In order to explore into this research issue, in the next section we first attempt to understand the 

concept of a coupled system, level, scale and its related dynamics . 

 

2. Understanding organization and its dynamics in Complex Adaptive System 

 

 2.1 Complex adaptive system 

 A coupled human-environment system or social-ecological system (SES), a space of continuous 

interactions among organizations of society and ecology for resource use, is essentially a 

complex adaptive system (CAS) (Janssen and Ostrom, 2006).  CASs like an immune system, 

political party, ecosystem or society are complex as they comprise of a network of multiple 

agents or elements working in parallel, self organized as coherent behavior emerges by 

competition and co-operation among agents, hierarchal as they are organized into successive 

levels with agents at one level as building blocks for agents at a higher level, adaptive as they 

can revise and re-arrange the building blocks with experience, anticipatory as they can predict on 

the basis of assumptions and always in transition between different states due to scope of 

perpetual novelty (Waldrop, 1993, pp 145-147). The elements in a CAS continuously interact 

with each other to form a complex structure that again dictates or constrains the type of 

interactions among its elements. For example, atoms search for a minimum energy state by 

forming chemical bonds with each other and thereby leading the way to form emergent structures 

named molecules, organisms co-operate and compete with each other while co-evolving with 

nature to form ecosystems, human beings try to satisfy their material needs by buying, selling 

and trading and leading to growth of markets. However, such an order in CAS is not fixed; it can 

occasionally be disrupted only to give way to new order to fit better with changed conditions 

(Waldrop, 1993, pp 288-294). The understanding of the hierarchal organization of the elements 

and their interaction within and across levels is central to the notion of vulnerability to change 

within a CAS (Holling, 2002).  

  

  



7 

 

2.2 Hierarchy and nestedness 

A hierarchal organization emerges as it offers more stability against disturbances to a system. 

Under favorable conditions, patterns emerge in slower and larger levels out of spatial and 

temporal interactions of structures and processes functioning in lower levels. These patterns can 

in turn interact with other higher level processes and patterns and form nested hierarchies 

(Peterson, 2000). In order to detect these patterns and their interactions within nested hierarchies, 

the concept of scale is crucial. For instance, if we take the classic example of boreal forest 

system, then at the level of patches in a spatial scale of 0.01 to 0.03 kilometers (kms.) and 

temporal scale of 10 to 1000 years, trees interact to shape fuel accumulation in the level of tree 

stands in a spatial level of 0.03 to 1 km and temporal scale of 10 to 100 years. It is at this level 

that large scale processes like fire interacts with the fuel accumulation to produce stand replacing 

forest fires. The pattern of forest stands, in the level of landscape at a spatial scale of 1 to 

100kms and temporal scale of 100 to 100 years, again influences large scale processes like 

weather and foraging which again shapes forest at zone level which can be detected at yet higher 

spatial and temporal scale i.e. 100 to greater than 3000kms and 1000 to 10,000 years respectively 

(Holling, 1992, Peterson, 2000). Examples of emergence through interactions among nested 

hierarchies can also be found in coupled human-environment system. At the scale of ecology, a 

species similar to human SARS is found in the level of masked civet cats and also raccoon dogs. 

Due to interaction of humans engaged in wildlife trade, the virus jumped the species level and 

effected individuals who handled live animals. Soon, through flows of resources and people in 

global commodity chains, SARS spread from Guangdon Province in China to world over causing 

the emergence of an epidemic in southeast Asia and produced a risk world over in 2003 (Adger, 

et al., 2009). Thus, different processes interact with emerging structures in different spatial and 

temporal scales to provide an order in the system.  

 

2.3 Dynamics in hierarchy 

 

However, such hierarchal organization is dynamic and there is always chance for a particular 

order of a CAS to be disrupted to give way to a new order. We can again take the example of 

forest stand to understand such dynamics. A young forest stand becomes denser as it grows 

gradually, accumulates fuel and becomes vulnerable to fire. After a fire event, the stand is re-

organized as new plants germinate from roots or seeds, thereby giving way to new forest stand. 

In such a dynamic scenario, we often see systems fluctuating between emergent patterns or 

stability states owing to the diversity in interactions among the structures and processes along 

spatial and temporal scale. As fire, outbreak of spruce budworm is a natural phenomenon of 

renewal of forest in eastern Canada and the United states. In this example two stability states 

exist, one is with low budworm population and other is with high budworm population. As the 

tree stands are young, the density of budworm feeding on them is low enough to maintain 

equilibrium with its own avian predation. However, as the stands mature and gain more foliage, 



8 

 

the density of budworm population increases such that is dilutes the effectiveness of budworm 

predation by insectivorous birds. Thus, the stability collapses and an insect outbreak is released 

which ushers a new state (Holling and Gunderson, 2002, pp 30). Similar dynamics can also be 

assumed in human management systems like bureaucracy. Gunderson et al. (2002) provides the 

example of the Corps of Engineers and South Florida Water Management District in United 

States. Generally these organizations spend time and resources in implementing public policies 

and monitoring key indicators in ecosystem. But during a natural crisis, any activist or group 

would criticize the policies claiming them to be no longer practical. This would trigger 

engagement of temporary groups outside the bureaucratic system which design alternative 

policies for the decision makers. In this case the activists can be compared to be the spruce 

budworm of management institutions and the temporary groups providing alternative futures 

(Gunderson et al., 2002, pp 327). 

 

2.4 Adaptive cycle and resilience within 

This dynamics or shift between stability states is explained by the adaptive cycle metaphor which 

describes how systems shift between 4 phases namely; exploitation, conservation, release and 

reorganization (see Annexure 1). The reorganization to a stable state however depends on the 

resilience of the system, which in turn dictates the vulnerability to shift to an altered state. 

Resilience is a dynamic property which changes as the system traverses through its adaptive 

cycle. Minimum resilience is during the phase of high connectedness as capital in any system 

grows from exploitation to conservation phase and maximum when there is release of capital 

followed by system reorganization. The latter is the phase of low connectivity among structural 

and process variables and novel entrants, like mutant species in an ecosystem or innovations in 

markets, which accumulate but are, kept out from expressing themselves during growth get a 

chance to compete with left overs of previous cycles like elements of matured forest or 

established markets. New interactions can be triggered while resilience is high during 

reorganization which will help the system adapt and remain functional in an altered environment.  

Such interactions, like that of a meeting of some entrepreneurs under a conducive market 

environment may lead to implementation  of a new idea or association of migrant populations of 

different species which took place during the retreat of ice sheets may have led to emergence of 

ecosystems as we observe today. Thus the diversity or heterogeneity in a system can organize 

and reorganize in different ways to adapt to changing environment (Holling and Gunderson, 

2002, pp 40-48).   

2.5 Nested cycles 

 The understanding of the dynamics of emerging pattern will be incomplete without special 

reference to the interactions between different adaptive cycles. If we refer back to the example of 

Boreal forest, Holling in his classic work on nested cycles analyzes the levels within the forest 



9 

 

system as adaptive cycles, with each level going through its own phases of birth, growth, death 

and renewal (as explained by 4phases of adaptive cycle). At relatively faster and smaller scales, 

as that in the level of patch, the structures are mediated by biophysical processes of interspecies 

plant competition for nutrients, light and water which influences local species composition and 

regeneration. At the meso-level of tree stands, disturbances like processes of fire, storm, insect 

outbreak and mammalian herbivory influence structure and successional dyanamics. At even 

larger and slower scales, as that of landscape, climate, biogeographical and geomorphological 

changes alter ecological structures (Holling et al., 2002, pp 69, Holling, 1992). In the same way, 

key variables of a human disease system like the disease organism, vectors and their susceptibles 

and human population can also be understood to be operating in three different levels with three 

different speeds i.e. fast, intermediate and slow (Holling et al., pp 69, MacDonald, 1973), to 

which we can also assume three different spatial attributes considering our previous example of 

SARS (Adger, 2009). But, it is the interaction among the adaptive cycles in different levels 

operating at different scales, which hold the key for understanding the dynamic features of 

hierarchal organization. 

 

2.6 Panarchy 

The Hierarchy theory explains that hierarchies are not static but the individual levels are transient 

structures maintained by interaction of processes across scales (Allen and Starr, 1982). However, 

the theory explains only one asymmetry of interaction between levels, i.e. of larger, slower levels 

constraining the behavior of faster, smaller levels which would again lead to the assumption of 

hierarchal organizations to be static without the possibility of novelty in the system. Although it 

is true, such that tree stands moderate the climate within the stand to narrow the range of 

temperature variation for individuals within it, but it is partial as it ignores the dynamics phase 

transitions in each level. As explained earlier, there is scope of re-organization in adaptive cycles 

of each level and novel associations among fresh entrants can lead to alternate states. There can 

be multiples connections among the nested cycles, each moving in different spatial and temporal 

scale and hence the terminology explaining it has evolved from that of hierarchy, often confused 

with top down control, to that of Panarchy after the Greek god Pan which symbolizes pervasive 

control of nature and also frequent disruptions of organization as reproduced in the word panic 

(Holling et al., 2002, pp 72-74) (see Annexure 2). 

 

2.7 Cross scale interactions within a panarchy 

 In a panarchial system, out of all the connections between the phases of levels moving in 

different scales, two most important for maintaining the resilience of the system, are termed to be 

“Remember and Revolt”. “Revolt” is an upward moving disturbance from fast and smaller levels 

to slower and larger levels whereas “Remember” is a constraint from the latter to the former. 



10 

 

“Revolt” can happen when a level in a panarchy enters the release phase and tries to re-organize 

in uncertain ways. A collapse of any level can cascade up to next higher level and pose a risk of 

collapse of the entire panarchy if the higher level is in its matured growth phase and has lost its 

flexibility. An ecological example of “Revolt” can be fire events which start from a small ground 

fire triggered by conditions of local ignition and spread to crown of a tree to patches in the forest 

(Holling et al., 2002, pp 75-76). Socio-political examples can be of political uprisings like that of 

Sepoy Mutiny in colonial India of 1857 which started in a Military cantonment in a place named 

Meerut, in north Indian state of Uttar Pradesh and had spread to different parts of the country. It 

is regarded as the First Battle of Indian Independence by historians and had led to change of 

political authority of the country from the East India Company to the British Crown (Bayly, 

1998). “Remember” in contrast is a connection in the opposite direction and is important during 

times of change and renewal. Once a collapse like situation is triggered in any of the levels in the 

panarchy, stored capital of a higher level in matured stage is drawn upon for reorganization of 

the lower level (Holling, et al., 2002, pp 76). This capital can be in the form of institutional 

memory (Berkes and Folke, 2002) or seed banks and surviving species accumulated during the 

growth phase, which help in the survival of a community (Fekette, 2009)  during natural hazard 

or revival of a forest patch (Holling, et al., 2002, pp 76).  

 

2.8 Resilience and its perspectives 

 Resilience, as described here, recognizes presence of multiple equilibrium or stability states and 

surprise events of change phenomena. It is defined as the magnitude of a disturbance that triggers 

a shift between alternative states. However it is mostly a perspective of ecological resilience, 

which suggests that it is an inherent adaptive property of a system which allows its fundamental 

function to persist even in times of extremes and disturbance. There also exists an engineering 

perspective of resilience, which defines it as rate of speed of recovery of a system following a 

disturbance or shock. It assumes the presence of a single equilibrium and describes systems 

behavior as one that resists departure from a particular stable state. Thus, ecological resilience 

focuses on the role of positive feedbacks, its ability to push system behavior away from any 

stable state and diversity generated within the system. On the other hand, engineering resilience 

stresses on negative feedbacks that reinforce stability by bringing it back to a single stable state 

and predictability of system behavior. Thus engineering resilience, which is generally concerned 

with mathematical representation of a recovery time of a system to its equilibrium, is more 

applicable to a linear system or when a non-linear system is nearing one of its equilibrium states.  

There is a tendency, among scientists or decision makers subscribing to this perspective, to 

concentrate only with one or a small group of variables (a-priori selected) and their scales of 

analysis or management are also often too narrow to witness the interactions of variables moving 

with different speeds (Gunderson and Allen, 2010, Allen et al., 2010). 



11 

 

The marked differences among the two perspectives also signify the difference in knowledge 

traditions and management approaches. The ecological perspective is more often used by 

scientists, with a biological tradition, who build up their research on empirical observations and 

try to integrate science with policy and management. On the contrary, engineering resilience is 

subscribed by scientists, within engineering and applied mathematics tradition, following mostly 

a deductive approach. The difference in management approaches renders from the difference in 

treatment of uncertainty within the two perspectives. The followers of engineering perspective 

rely on the predictability of the system by trying to control the disturbance events and optimize 

the conditions for only those interactions that lead to growth of resources (eg. fishes in a fishery 

or tress in forest) in the system which can meet with a social, economic or engineering objective. 

By increasing homogeneity, it reduces the functional diversity of a system, which is seen as the 

key to maintain its adaptive capacity. By controlling disturbance events like fire or insect 

outbreaks in a forest system, it inhibits the structuring processes that could usher novelty into the 

system and keep it adaptive to any external change, it makes the system vulnerable to an 

irreversible change (Holling, 1996). An example is of the suppression of spruce budworm 

populations in Canada during the 1950s and 1960s. In order to preserve the pulp and paper 

industry, insecticides were used which reduced the defoliation by the insect and hence tree 

mortality was delayed. This led to growth of pulp mills, and at the same time left the economy 

vulnerable to a sever downfall owing to the rising vulnerability of the forest to an intense 

outbreak due to rise in the homogeneity of the foliage. This again demanded more vigilance and 

control over the forest resources by the management institutions (Holling, 1996, p 59). 

Thus, trying to engineer the system to maintain a particular equilibrium or stable state may lead 

to less resilient and more vulnerable ecosystem, rigid and unresponsive management institutions 

and more dependent societies. Holling (1996) provides evidence for the hypothesis of loss of 

variability to loss of resilience from biological system. Ectotherms i.e. cold blooded animals 

have a higher range of viable internal body temperature as compared to water ectotherms or even 

more in case of endotherms i.e. warm blooded animals which regulate their body temperature to 

a narrow range. Although such regulation seems to render endotherms vulnerable but they have a 

range of mechanisms to control temperature which can extend from evaporative cooling to 

metabolic heat generation. Each mechanism has different but again overlapping range of 

conditions and different efficiencies for response. It this overlapping “soft” redundancy that 

marks the difference between regulation of biological systems and those proposed by 

engineering resilience paradigm. Even examples from ecosystems can provide the importance of 

role of such redundancy in maintaining consistency. Holling, once again returns to his example 

of predation of spruce budworm in the forests of eastern Canada. He observed that some species 

of insectivorous birds predate moderately over a broad range of prey densities, while some other 

species predate heavily over narrow ranges of prey density while there are some which maintain 

their predation between high and low. The density at which predation impact is maximal also 

differs according to species. Through intra-species completion, the aggregate predation effect is 

kept low when there are large numbers of predator and very less prey whereas it increases with 



12 

 

the reverse condition. Thus it seen that the risks and benefits are widely spread to retain 

consistency in performance irrespective of the fluctuations in individual species. This, Holling 

explains as the “heart of role of functional diversity” in maintain ecosystem structure and 

function (Holling, 1996, pp 61-62). 

Another important feature in natural systems that is important for its consistency is the tendency 

to function at the edge of instability i.e. at the boundary of a stable state. Holling, once again 

cites the example of endotherms, which can maintain high body temperature, at the edge of one 

of their stability domain i.e. life itself. Speed and stamina increase and endotherms can maintain 

activities at both high and low temperatures and exist in habitats unbearable for ectotherms. Thus 

here we can see that variability is not eliminated but curtailed at one place and transferred from 

animal‟s internal environment to external environment as a result of allowing the animal to 

explore for opportunity and change. Inferences from such examples from nature suggest that 

control of internal dynamics at the edge of instability generates options for exploration into 

uncertainty of the external world. Although of controlling is part and parcel of engineering 

resilience, the creation of opportunities at the edge of stability is a component to be pondered 

upon (Holling, 1996, pp 62-63). 

Thus, management practices have to see beyond their scales of operation and the strategies will 

have to designed not so much for maximizing productivity but for the interrelationship between 

people and resources such that they can be sustained in times of crisis and “surprises”. Thus 

ecological resilience paradigm calls for integration of sciences, knowledge at different levels and 

public participation for exploring alternative futures. However, movement towards such a 

paradigm is only seen when the very goal maintained by rigid institutions is abandoned. Holling 

(1996) cites the example of control of budworm and growth of pulp industry in New Brunswick 

in Canada. The rigid control gave off when a forest inventory report indicated insufficiency of 

wood stock to sustain the industry in future which ushered new laws of restructuring 

management policies and created opportunity for local industries for innovation (Holling, 1996, 

pp 64-65). 

 However, such management practices can be sustained only when there is ecological resilience 

as well as trust on the management (Holling, 1996) which again illustrates the importance of 

design and acceptance of adaptive strategies after a crisis.  

 

3. Concept and challenge of Scale 

 

We have already used the term scale and level while describing hierarchy and its dynamics in a 

system. In this section, we try to understand them as concepts that are referred in different 

literature and point out the challenges that the uses of these concepts pose for scientific analysis 

or assessments and decision making.  



13 

 

3.1 Scale of analysis versus scale of phenomenon 

In order to observe and analyze the patterns emerging out of different interactions among 

structures and processes, different scales are used. Accordingly, scale is defined as the spatial, 

temporal and analytical dimensions used by scientists to measure and analyze objects and 

processes (Gibson, 2000, Fekete, 2009). Gibson describes levels as distinct regions in a 

measurement scale, as Macro, Meso and Micro are levels in spatial scale describing large, 

intermediate and small size phenomena or long, medium and short durations are levels in 

temporal scale representing relatively slow, intermediate and fast processes. Every scale 

incorporates an extent which is described as the magnitude of dimension used to measure a 

phenomenon, and a resolution which refers to the precision of the measurement (Gibson, 2000). 

A social scientist may fix his extent to the level of a village and use a resolution of households in 

a jurisdictional scale. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA) (2003) explains that a 

level of an organization (as described in this text) is not equivalent to a scale, but can be 

measured or analyzed through a scale. It further differentiates scale into a unit of observation of a 

process and an intrinsic characteristic of a process. The former i.e. scale of observation (referred 

as scale of analysis in this paper) has been described as a “filter or window of perception” 

through which assessments can be conducted, observations can be made and information and 

knowledge acquired. Through this description, it can be imagined that patterns observed through 

the scale of observation of a watershed will be different as through an ecological zone, as both 

are different levels of an agro-ecosystem (Dalgard et al., 2003), each in its own dynamics. 

However, MEA differentiates the scale of phenomenon as the extent or duration of any social or 

ecological process, defined as its “characteristic scale”, for example change events like El Nino 

have a characteristic return time. Therefore we can assume an incomplete or total lack of 

understanding if the scale of observation/analysis does not match with the characteristic scale of 

any phenomenon or process (MEA, 2003). In order to simplify, Fekete et al. (2009), attempts to 

connect this scale of phenomenon with magnitude, amplitude or extent as used in common 

English while renaming „extent‟ of any spatial, temporal or analytical scale as a “Research Area” 

and resolution in it as “Units”. 

Hierarchies and associated dynamics, as explained here, exist in all complex systems ranging 

from cells and ecosystems to social systems (Gibson, et al., 2000, Westley et al., 2002). In order 

to grasp the emergent patterns of such dynamics, there is a need to incorporate conceptual scales 

apart from spatial and temporal scales in any framework for scientific analysis. Westley et al. 

(2002) explains that the sense making behavior of humans lead to abstraction which facilitates 

their organization according to paradigms or “structures of signification” (Westley et al., 2002, 

Westley, 1995). The systems created through their sense making consist of their own levels 

which may or may not match with the levels in the real world (Westley et al., 2002). Such social 

systems can be institutions of culture or decision making, which emerge out of interactions 

among reflexive human beings. Thus there have been attempts to dissect abstract systems of 

power (Lukes, 1973) economy (Whitaker, 1987) and society (Westley, 1995) into distinct 



14 

 

conceptual levels on the basis of functional relationships (Gibson et al., 2000). Due to this buffer 

between the real world and the systems created by human ingenuity, there is always scope for 

mismatch between scales of human actions, social structure and ecological systems which can 

lead to incomplete understanding of the real world and also inappropriate and unacceptable 

decisions (Mclaughlin and Dietz., 2008).  

 

3.2 Challenges of scale 

Willibanks and Kates (1999) explains that even if we ignore the fact that different processes 

operate in different scales, still our understanding of the world is influenced by scale. In the 

context of global change, they describe how complex relations among society, economy and 

environment can be persuaded in local level studies with smaller resolutions as they bring out the 

entire variance without being masked by generalizations in broader scales. They also point out 

how perspectives vary over a problem when observed through different scales of analysis, due to 

identification of different patterns of same problem. They cited the example of the problem of 

cost of energy efficiency improvement, where macro scale economics suggested a significant net 

cost to national economy in United States of America while micro scale work of many regions 

within the same country often estimated a net benefit (Willibanks and Kates, 1999). 

 Problems of scale mismatch may arise when a particular problem is known only at a certain 

level while the decision for intervention has to be taken at different level. This challenge is 

termed as the “scale discordance” problem and the glaring example can be of climate change 

studies. In this case, information is often sought at lower levels of jurisdiction like nation or 

states by decision makers for understanding impacts and planning for adaptive strategies, while 

predictions from climate models increasingly lose their precision at lower scales of analysis. 

Scale mismatch is also evident when a level of decision making in a jurisdictional or any other 

management scale does not match with the extent (also “characteristic scale” as in MEA, 2003) 

of a problem being faced. This challenge is termed as “institutional fit problem” and the best 

example can be of transboundary air or water pollution which is a problem in the basin level and 

is beyond the national level management of individual countries in the basin.  

In the efforts to account for these mismatches, science and decision making often arrive at a 

particular scale of analysis and then up scale or down scale information for use at an agreed upon 

level. As mentioned before, reliance on such techniques may again lead to the ignorance of 

important cross scale interactions which are found to be crucial in maintenance of the system 

(Cash and Moser, 2000, Cash et al., 2006). In order to widen the knowledge base and distribute 

responsibility and power for better management of resources, co-management strategies are often 

recommended. It creates a scope for engagement and learning among institutions, operating in 

different spatial and management levels, as for example state and resource user committees 

However such approaches also have to deal with the “plurality” of outcomes due to different 



15 

 

interactions within and across scales (Cash et al, 2006). Under such a management system, actors 

can associate in a myriad of ways within and across the levels of management according to their 

own perceptions of costs and benefits out of the collaborations. The different combinations of 

partnerships can give rise to different outcomes from the management regime which can again 

levy different costs and benefits on the actors (Adger, 2006).   

 

3.3 The challenges- From a disciplinary approach 

For a better understanding of the problems of global change, a need to integrate disciplines of 

social science with those of natural science has already been felt. But the conceptualization of 

scale always offers one of the primary challenges for the union of the sciences. Scale has always 

been the focus of any discipline when it comes to identification and explanation of emergent 

patterns, derivation of theory by generalization of pattern in one level observed through a 

particular scale to levels in different scales and optimization of processes in levels of interest. 

Physics with its theories of mechanics and ecology with its hierarchy theory have dealt 

intensively with the issue of scale and dynamics. However multiple interpretations of scale 

among disciplines of social sciences have inhibited its common understanding in social sciences, 

let alone between social and natural sciences. In varying versions of its extent component, scale 

finds its mention in levels of input-output in micro-economics, enterprises or households within 

an economy as in ecological economics, size of population, active labor force, number of 

households, value added to production processes within a territory and spatial area as in urban 

studies or explicitly as spatial scales as in physical geography (Gibson et al., 2000).  

The relevance of cross level interactions across different scales has also been demonstrated in 

various disciplines. The most significant of them are in the macro-economics branch of 

economics discipline, political science, political economy and human geography branch of 

geography. In macroeconomics, Dasgupata (1997) has studied the influence of individual 

decision making by and to emergent features of society like cultural values or national income. 

He differentiates emergent features into fast moving variables like changes in national income 

and rate of inflation and slow moving variables like cultural values, norms or institutions. Many 

sociologists have also pointed towards the importance of interactions within  levels in different 

spatial and temporal scales while understanding historical and social systems  The study of 

federalism in political science points out the linkages in multiple tiers of a governance system 

which fall in different levels of a jurisdictional scale (Gibson et al., 2000). Much of the work on 

the process of diffusion of policy innovations and lobbying of networks of organizations at the 

same level for changes in a higher level addresses the horizontal and vertical linkages among 

levels in the governance system (Schreurs, 2008). In political economy, the social choice theory 

by Kenneth Arrow proves that it is impossible to scale up from an individual preference function 

to a group preference or public interest function which could satisfy a set of desirable properties 

of aggregation process. Similar work in this discipline suggests that in a situation of multiple 



16 

 

policy choices, a common agenda is often accepted by domination of certain preferences (Gibson 

et al., 2000). Ellinor Ostrom‟s theory of collective action also points at a different set of criteria 

for optimal outcomes in a collective level as compared to an individual level in the scale of 

management of resources (Ostrom, 1990, Gibson et al., 2000). In human geography branch of 

geography, the issue of scaling spaces comes under the scanner as a political process between 

various mobilizing social groups in the local level and ideologies and social structures (Marston, 

2000). Social groups may “jump scales” to form networks and use ideologies beyond their scale 

of operation for the representation of their causes (Jones, 1969). The point of consensus of these 

different conceptualizations lies in the need for multi level studies of any system by 

incorporating different scales of analysis and finding possible points for policy intervention in 

different levels for the same problem (Ostrom, 2010). However, a neglect of the plurality 

challenge of scale dynamics can lead to the wrong hypothesis of an existence of single solution 

of complex problems and ignorance of uncertainty in any scientific analysis (Ostrom, 2007).  

 

 3.4 Plurality of scale dynamics to plural ways of knowing 

Human geographers question the process of shaping of scales in this world, which are otherwise 

treated as absolute by physical geography and also its related discipline of GIS. They regard 

scale as a social construct which emerges from a political struggle between structures of society 

and local action and is therefore a dynamic concept (Jones, 1969, Marston, 2000). This discipline 

tries to explain the shift of scales of the same space, as for example the shift of neighborhood 

scale to metropolitan scale of a city after it has gone through a process of urban planning. As 

urban planners introduced modern techniques like geometrical planning, zoning and social 

cartography to understand the city, the way of knowing the city was altered and a casual 

observation became trivial (Jones, 1969). Similarly, the way of knowing a particular problem i.e. 

the selection of a scale of analysis of a problem can depend on the power of a paradigm and/or 

on the interests of certain actors. Such politics in scaling is exemplified in selection of national 

scale analysis of vulnerability to food crisis in Ethiopia. National level had been selected as the 

scale of analysis as it helped the donors to channelize funds while also provided a scope for the 

decision makers of the country to attract funding by showing the required numbers (Stephen, 

2004). In this regard, work in political economy also shows that politics arising out of plurality 

challenge of scale is not restricted to scales of analysis. It may also find its place in variable 

selection while analyzing any level and also in selection of actors for collaboration in networks 

for co-management (Adger et al., 2006, Ostrom, 2007). 

Multiple outcomes may emerge due to combinations of different variables within and across 

levels in different scales (Ostrom, 2007). Therefore even in a multilevel study, there can be 

plurality in identification of emergent patterns due to selection of different variables in any level 

in a scale. This may lead to different interpretations of the same problem and hence different 

perspectives for problem solving. Ostrom explains that a reduced set of variables by Garett 



17 

 

Hardins in his classic study on common pool resources led to an incomplete understanding of 

commons management problem and finally recommend either a state or private intervention for 

saving “tragedy of commons” like scenarios. However, inclusions of variables like norms and 

social capital in the level of Users in an interlinked SES comprising of Resources system (eg. a 

pasture), Governance system (formal or informal governance actors), Resource units (eg. grazing 

animals) and Users (eg. herders) can change the outcome of such “social dilemma” and lead to 

an efficient and effective community management regime (Ostrom, 2007).  

As mentioned before, similar to different outcomes in a scientific assessment by combining 

different variables, interactions of different actors across institutions in different levels of 

management can lead to emergence of different outcomes from co-management regimes. The 

differential access to information on resources by governance structures may create a power 

struggle among resource users bonded by social capital, to mobilize through horizontal linkages. 

Such mobilizations may find partners beyond a single community, and can also find 

collaborators in other levels of the co-management structures on the basis of commonality of 

interests, like media or Non- governmental organizations to rally for a change. But this is only 

one aspect; there can be interactions within levels which may benefit solely regulators, as for 

example workshops and forums between policy makers and scientists without leaving scope for 

inclusion or dissemination of knowledge in the level of resource users. Therefore the interplay of 

the associations between actors of same and different levels within and across scales can lead to 

variance in costs and benefits among actors and time (Adger et al., 2006). Therefore be it a 

multilevel study of a system or a co-management approach, it is difficult to find a “panacea” 

(Adger, 2006, Ostrom, 2007) for understanding and solving systemic problems like vulnerability 

to risks. 

 

3.4 Search for a way, away from “Panaceas” 

 From the above discussion it is evident that there cannot be a single way of understanding and 

solving the problems shaped by cross scale linkages due to plurality in emergence and 

differences in methods of identification of patterns in a system. Challenges of scale have been 

dealt intensively in the discipline of ecology (Levin, 1992) from where theories of hierarchy and 

lately panarchy have been adopted as theoretical frameworks or paradigms to study social and 

socio-ecological systems (Peterson, 2000, Petrosillo et al., 2010). However, as Adger argues, 

issues of power are intrinsic to each level of any organization and cannot be studied merely by 

dissecting it as one of the subsystems of a bigger system. Power can be manifested while 

selecting any paradigm to frame a problem by a researcher or adhering to any ideology by a 

decision maker while designing response to a risk (Adger, 2006). Therefore, partitioning SESs 

into multiple levels according to a pre-decided criteria and analyzing the influence of linkages 

among the levels by any researcher can bring one close to a real system but again there is always 

scope for other versions of reality by use of different criteria (Checkland, 1985, Ostrom, 2007).  



18 

 

In this regard we can look towards soft systems approach which provides for means of group 

modeling and shared understanding of any systemic problem among researchers following 

different discourses and decision makers with different mindsets. It denotes the understanding of 

any problem in a system through paradigms and corresponding frameworks as systems of “logic” 

and differentiates it from the problem as seen in the context or empirically, which is again 

denoted as systems of “culture” (Checkland and Scholes, 1992). It tries to bring together the 

systems of “logic and culture” to give a wider understanding by the recognition of the diversity 

of factors involved in a problem. Such an approach offers an involvement of stakeholders in 

various levels of the system and hence a point of intervention can be sought through a 

negotiation process (Bayer, Vari and Thompson, 2006). Though, such an intervention may not be 

exactly the optimal for the system but it will have the acceptance of all the stakeholders which 

will in turn facilitate its implementation (Ostrom, 2010). Hence, any decision for intervention in 

a system reached through such a process is often referred as-“systemically desirable and 

culturally feasible” (Checkland and Scholes, 1992). However, this would require a thorough 

understanding of the challenges of group modeling methods, selection of discourses to fit 

systems of logic and the negotiation process before its use in looking into problems of 

vulnerability and adaptation to long term environmental change (Venix, 1996). 

 

4.  Risk of irreversible change in  ecosystem to vulnerability of collapse of the SES  – 

The logic of the problem    

 

4.1 Novelty and collapse in panarchy 

The seeds of change in any panarchial system lie in its nested cycles. The ushering in of novelty 

in any adaptive cycle can cascade upwards through the connected cycles and change the entire 

system as we knew it. Holling et al. (2002, p 89), citing the example of evolution from 

chimpanzee to humans as they share 98.4 percent of same DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid), 

explain that such change is not the result of point mutations but rather the new combination 

resulting with the existing genes which can lead to new adaptive pathways for selection. 

Similarly, the industrial revolution in Europe was not due just due to invention of steam engine, 

but the socio-economic context of that era reinforced the novelty and led to a transformation of 

the system. However, evolution in ecosystems is a slow process as it rare that cycles in different 

levels will enter through a vulnerable stage at the same time i.e. either in the release phase or 

become excessive connected, that it can be changed completely by any lower level disturbance 

(Holling et al., 2002 p 90). But such makeover is more often seen in social systems which can 

undergo organizational changes due to “surprise” or crisis events that were not anticipated by 

their sense making (Holling et al., 2002, Janssen, 2002, Holling, 1995). 



19 

 

Apart from novelty to adapt to any change event in the environment, episodes of collapse also 

trickle down the nested cycles of a panarchy. Novelty is systemic as it accumulates within the 

system; collapse is due to a stochastic event external to the system. It can overcome any 

sustaining property of panarchy and trigger devastating cascades down the levels of the system. 

A glaring example can be of the loss of biodiversity due impact of asteroid that had hit Earth 

almost 70 million years ago. Such an event, not only eradicated species but also destroyed the 

ecological niches, the mesh of interactions which sustains life itself. As a result recovery was 

slow, and new species, families and orders derived the opportunity to interact and a new way of 

life emerged which ushered the dominance of mammals and extinction of the dinosaurs (Holling, 

et al., 2002 pp 91-92). Similar examples are also seen in social system during breakdown of a 

governance regime in a state where collapse of the system is succeeded by slow reversals.   

Like ushering of novelty into the system, collapse also starts in any one level going through a 

vulnerable phase of its cycle. The diversity in any system is the storehouse for resilience of the 

system which helps it to stay adaptive in the face of environmental change. The loss of diversity 

and potential to accumulate due to misuse or an external force can lead to a “poverty trap” which 

is a perverse state in the normal adaptive cycle with low potential for accumulation of resources, 

low connectedness among the elements as well as low resilience. Such a situation in any level 

can lead to a cascading effect eroding levels of the panacrhy. The example of such trap can be 

found in the history of economic and ecological imperialism which finds its collapse stages in 

episodes of famines.  In another extreme, a system may be sustainable but “maladaptive” when 

the potential for accumulation is high, connectedness is high but at the same time, unlike a 

normal adaptive cycle, even resilience is high. This would mean that the system focuses just on 

those connections that lead to its accumulation and tries to keep any novel entrant at bay. The 

accumulation can be measured in terms of wealth and connectedness can be maintained through 

strict rules (Holling et al, 2002, p 96). The ideal examples can be of heightened bureaucratic 

control of resources for serving a scientific objective or democratic goal (Prtichard and 

Sanderson, 2002) and the Hindu caste system which initially started for sustainable use of land 

resources (Holling et al., 2002, pp97-98). However collapse of such rigid and maladaptive social 

systems can be associated with the simultaneous collapse of resource system to control which 

such systems emerge at first. This can be supported by myriad of examples of changes from 

control and command mechanisms to participatory mechanisms of governance as fish stocks 

disappear in a fishery or agriculture comes to a standstill during periods of draught ((Prtichard 

and Sanderson, 2002). The caste system also disorganized after the degradation of the natural 

resource base during the British Raj in India (Holling et al, 2002, p 97). 

 

4.2 Irreversible change 

Ecosystem states vary between certain known stable states but seldom move towards irreversible 

state which poses as surprise to a management institution and from where recovery becomes very 



20 

 

difficult. Collapse of a SES is mostly attributed to a slow change in the resource system which is 

often not observed by the management due to its narrow focus on certain key variables which it 

perceives as important for accumulation of resources. The system which has lost its diversity due 

to control of disturbance factors moves to a very different state when such a slow change 

accumulate and ultimately pushes the adaptive cycle to its release phase. Even the accumulating 

slow change may actually be a result of any myopic management policy which then goes 

unnoticed due to its narrow focus (Holling, 1995). Due to the initial success of such maximizing 

policy, societies become increasingly dependent on the resources and as the resource system flips 

into a surprise or irreversible state, there is loss of trust on the management institution which 

may destabilize the governance regime (Janssen, 2002, Holling, 1995).  

There are ample evidences of such surprises due to lack of understanding of the non linearity in 

system and ignorance of changes in slow moving variables. One of the classic examples of 

failure of optimization is the myth of maximum sustainable yield of fisheries. As the fish stock 

decreases beyond a certain level due to harvesting, a different set of processes like depensation 

and switching behavior of predators take over which makes the recovery of the stock very 

difficult. Hence if the variability of the processes is taken into account in a fish stock assessment, 

it can lead to a collapse of the fishery. In another example of a modeling exercise of a fishery 

lake, it was observed that economic incentives led to change of the riparian forest by cutting 

trees near the lake to facilitate boating and fishing activity. This changed the slow variable-

habitat of the fishery (fallen trees) which controlled the fish population dynamics. The model 

showed that apart from normal year to year fluctuations, there was gradual decrease in stock and 

there was an abrupt release phase in the system. There was a collapse of the desirable state (here 

one with abundant fish stock) and fishers left the system which brought down the economic 

indicators. Similar collapse is also seen in agro-ecosystems with phosphorous levels in surface 

water. Phosphorous was measured in three different levels of the system in western Great Lakes 

region of North America, in soil (slow turnover), lake mud (intermediate turn over) and lake 

water (fast turnover). As a result of phosphorous intensive farming practices, there is slow 

growth of soil phosphorous, cycles in mud phosphorous of around 200years and occasional 

outbreaks of high lake water phosphorous. The policy maker sets a goal only for phosphorous 

level in lake water with dual objective of maintaining farm yields and water quality. Thus there 

are cycles of high phosphorous in the lake which leads to decline of farm practices. But as there 

is halt of phosphorous intensive practices, the stability state of low phosphorous level in water 

returns which again attracts farm practices (Carpenter et al., 2002). 

The research question important for adaptation is not so much about when and how collapse may 

occur or how much a SES is vulnerable to collapse, but it is more about pathways of 

reorganization after a cycle of collapse. As we saw from previous section that there is no panacea 

in understanding or managing a SES, so there will always be uncertainty of outcomes. Narrow 

focus on objectives set by polity or market rationalists may lead to biasness of a control over 

uncertainty which may ultimately lead to rigid institutions and destruction of diversity. This in 



21 

 

turn renders the resource system vulnerable to collapse as a result of a stochastic event and 

finally destabilization of the SES due to loss of trust on the governance regime (Prtichard and 

Sanderson, 2002, Carpenter et al., 2002, Janssen, 2002). Cycles of collapse and renewal is 

inevitable in ecosystem, so the question important to ponder for sustainability of SES are the 

following- 

 

 How do we form an appropriate and acceptable strategy for adaptation when the state of a 

system changes? 

 What is the appropriate form of governance which can maintain the ecological resilience 

of system for adaptation during periods of environmental change? 

 

But the answer to these questions lies partially in the understanding of the pathways that lead to 

irreversible state change of a managed ecosystem which can further pose the SES vulnerable to 

collapse. Such attempts to unravel the intrinsic dynamics of a SES that can lead to irreversible 

change in its resource system leads us to looks towards the context of irreversible change from 

lush paddy fields to sand filled landscapes in an agro-ecosystem of Brahmaputra basin in India. 

 

5. The context 

5.1 The Mishing Community 

The Mishing or Miri
iv
 community residing along the Assam-Arunachal Pradesh border of India, 

by the banks of the river Brahmaputra and its tributaries like Subansiri and Ranganadi, has 

always experienced annual floods during the monsoon period. Through their coping 

mechanisms, like special types of huts over tree stumps, boating skills, shifting livelihoods 

between agriculture, fishing and animal husbandry, they have adapted to a particular pattern of 

the flood hazard. There is strong social cohesion among the community and they have local 

institutions for early warning before the hazard. However, the change in the type of hazard itself 

has created new risks for the community. Massive amount of agricultural land has been 

submerged, embankments have been breached and deposition of silt is changing the context 

within which the community used to thrive
v
. 

There are scholarly articles which relate the Mishing tribe with the hill tribes of Arunachal 

Pradesh like the Adi community. However, there is also evidence that they arrived from Howang 

ho-Yangtze valley of China merely approximately 300 years ago unlike the tribes of Arunachal 

who‟s arrival dates back to even 2200BC (Phukan, 2010). They arrived at a time when there 

were already chiefdoms in hills of Arunachal Pradesh and established kingdom of the Ahom 

dynasty (established in 1228AD) in the plains of Assam. As a result, they served as middlemen 

between the hill tribes and the kingdom, and slowly gained trust of the Ahoms. Soon, they were 



22 

 

given settlement places in flood prone areas of now Dhemaji, Lakhimpur and Jorhat district of 

Assam, some which were formerly vacated by the Ahoms themselves due to recurring floods. 

The community learnt to live with the annual floods with shifting livelihoods, Chang Ghars 

(local term for house over tree stumps) and more or less a nomadic lifestyle
vi
. 

 

5.2 The Agro-ecosystem 

The Matmora Gram Panchayat with 16 revenue villages, under Dhakuakhana sub-division of 

Lakhimpur district tells a story of bust and boom in paddy production. The entire district has 

fertile alluvial soil for paddy cultivation and even its name resonates with wealth (Lakhi- Hindu 

goddess of Wealth). The Mishing farmers of Matmora area were the major rice producers in the 

district till 1998. From 1964 to 1998, they became so self-sufficient in food production that they 

had to just buy salt and kerosene from the market (Das, 2009). 

 The 1950 earthquake in Assam which changed the course of the Brahmaputra and its tributaries 

aggravated the flooding of its plains. As a result the state government, following a technocratic 

paradigm of jacketing rivers, built mud embankments wherever they were missing. However, 

embankments or Mathauri/Garhs (local name also found in historical records or Buronjis 

prepared by Ahoms) were not new to the region as it was the Ahoms who introduced them. But 

the striking difference in the design process is the issue of soil moisture testing to construct the 

embankments away from the play zone of the river. The rivers of northern part of Assam have 

always been prone to course change due to close to site of their origin in the Himalayas. Hence, 

there used to be royal soil testers of the Ahoms who had their own know-how of predicting the 

play zone of the river by licking the soil to measure its moisture content (referred to as 

Maticheleka Barua in Ahom Buronjis). However in the colonial times and more so now in the 

present times, a rise in population along with settlement structures inhibits the continuation of 

such a practice (Phukan, 2001). 

The Matmora embankment was constructed in 1964 to protect the villages from the floods of 

Brahmaputra River. The dependence of the Mishing population thriving in the area over this 

structure led them to forget their nomadic lifestyle and become settled paddy farmers. However, 

the embankment slowly changed the river character and as already in the play zone of the river, 

led to a problem of embankment erosion. After 34 years of its construction, in 1998, two and half 

kilometers of the embankment was finally washed away. The pattern of the floods also changed 

and the inhabitants observed a rise in flooding events per annum. During this time, the 

embankment was rebuilt every time it is eroded and the Public Works Department (PWD) tried 

to shift its position to match the lateral movement of the river. This resulted in a continuous 

displacement of the villages which led to migration and also settlements started right over the 

embankment adding further pressure on the structure (Das et al., 2009). 



23 

 

The final blow came in 2007 to 2009, when there were incidences of flash floods along with 

huge amount of silt deposition by the river. Some of the villages like Khamon Birina and 

Janjidangdhora of the area are casted in sand as high as 7feet from ground and crop area has 

reduced to nil
vii

. The state government reacted in 2009, by shifting from age old mud 

embankments only to latest technology Geo-tubes to protect the villages from future flood. 

However, the sand is still there in the agricultural land and no strategy has yet been planned for 

adaptation, rehabilitation or mass clearing of the land. The policy of the state government has 

always been a technocratic one with fixing its solution in the village level. The slow change of 

the river character by embankments has mostly gone unnoticed. 

5.3 The Political issue 

In the midst of the priorities of the dominant Assamese middle class for achieving economic 

growth at par with the rest of India and ending insurgency in the state, the concern of the tribal 

Mishing community has more often been left aside from any political debate. However the latest 

turn of events, have drawn attention of the local egalitarian civil societies like the Krishak Mukti 

Sangram Samiti (KMSS), media, academicians and activists from Mishing community as well as 

other parts of the nation. However, the primary focus of the political struggle has been to stop the 

dam construction in the Subansiri River and expose plots of corruption in rehabilitation of flood 

victims and also construction of embankments. There is no debate over any strategy for 

adaptation of the Mishing community of Matmora area to this new type of hazard. Such farmers 

along with their counter parts from Arunachal, Manipur and Nagaland have joined in protests 

and demonstrations triggered by KMSS which have sometimes turned violent
viii

. Moreover in a 

state like Assam which had violent student revolution and insurgency problems, there is always a 

risk to the polity that areas like Matmora can turn into recruit grounds for the insurgency groups, 

due to separatist sentiments, material gains or merely due to the sense of being marooned.  

5.4 Search for causal mechanisms  

The reasons for such a bulk of silt carried by the river is attributed to many factors like upstream 

development work in Arunachal Pradesh, dam construction in tributaries like Ranganadi and 

Subansiri, increased rate of erosion in upstream owning to change in monsoon pattern and failure 

of flood control measures and nexus of corruption (Gohain, 2008, Das, 2009). However, there is 

still a lack of understanding how all the potential factors interacted to lead to the present state of 

the ecosystem. We hypothesize that factors in multiple levels of both ecological and socio-

economic domains, operating in different scales interacted to lead to this state.  

Such an understanding will be crucial for planning and implementation of an efficient, effective 

and just decision for adaptation of the Mishing community. However, going back to the issue of 

differential outcomes and different ways of knowing, such an understanding by any modeling 

exercise will be partial. This leads to add our first research question-  



24 

 

 How can we have an integrated model of the causal mechanisms that lead to an 

irreversible change in a multilevel SES?   

 

 

Annexure 1 

 

Figure 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The above figure (Holling, 2001) depicts the adaptive cycle of a system where in there is first 

accumulation of capital (which may be biomass and nutrient in an ecosystem or even economic or social 

capital in a social system) from r to K phase in which the elements and processes of the system becomes 

tightly connected and the system itself slowly moves towards a particular equilibrium. Although the 

capital is stored for reaching a particular matured stage, it provides potential for alternative stages in 

future by accumulating chance mutations to arrive at another ecosystem or networks of human 

relationships for a regime shift in social system. However it is only due to an external disturbance, like a 

forest fire or insect outbreak in a forest there may be release of biomass or nutrients from the soil and loss 

of the tight organization. Similar kind of losses and finally a collapse can be apprehended even in a social 

 POTENTIAL   

 

 CONNECTEDNESS  

 

  

RESILIENCE  

    Ω 

 

       α 

 

 

K 

 

   r 

 

 Exploitation   

 

Conservation  

 

   Release 

 

 Reorganization 



25 

 

system, for example, at the onset of a societal revolt against a rigid political set up. This starts the „back 

loop‟ of the cycle which is a phase of radical change as oppose to the former incremental growth. The 

phase from Ω to α is a phase of rapid reorganization where elements that were in isolated connections in 
the prior phase recombines to form novel linkages which pave the path for innovations in the next cycle. 

This phase is highly unpredictable and uncertain as previously accumulated mutations, inventions and 

capital can organize into new order providing new opportunity. Hence this adaptive cycle represents two 

objectives- the first is of „production and accumulation‟ (which builds up the „potential or wealth‟ of the 

system that can be utilized in all future options) and second is of „invention and reassortment‟, both of 

which cannot be maximized simultaneously but can occur only sequentially (Holling, 2001).  

In the above figure, the short arrows represent a slow changing situation whereas the long arrows 

represent the rapid changing situation. The third dimension of the adaptive cycle namely resilience, 

remains high in the „back loop‟ of the cycle where connectivity and regulation is low and conditions for 

facilitating experimentation is escalated. Whether the liberated resources during the change event, are lost 

to the system or captured and reorganized back into the same order, is decided in the α phase of the cycle. 

If there is too much of distortion or loss during the change or if there is insufficient „memory‟ for 

reconstruction, then the system may shift to a new regime with different actors, species and functions. If 

the system starts on a new path, then in the r phase, the self organizing attribute of the interactions 

facilitate the positioning of the new actors into a new mesh of relations, which identify the new regime 

(Holling, 2001).   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



26 

 

 

Annexure 2 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure2 demonstrates the hierarchical arrangement of adaptive systems in different spatial and temporal 

scales (Panarchy). It also demonstrates the cross-scalar interactions which provides scope for change 

(„revolt‟ from experimentation and creativity in smaller scales) as well as serves as a source of stability 

(interaction represented as „remember‟, which provides capital and memory during periods of change in 

the intermediate scale). The whole panarchy is thereby sustainable as it is both “creative and conserving”. 

             INTERSCALAR INTERACTION -REVOLT 

SMALL SCALE AND FAST ADAPTIVE CYCLE 

INTERMEDIATE SCALE WITH MEDIUM 

SPEED ADAPTIVE CYCLE 

LARGE SCALE WITH 

SLOW ADAPTIVE CYCLE 

               INTERSCALAR INTERACTION -REMEMBER 

   K 

 

   α 

 

   Ω 

 

   r 

 

       α 

 

Ω 

 



27 

 

It provides scope to create, test and maintain adaptive capacity. (Holling,B. 2001). But large stochastic 

events can cause a collapse of panarchies by destroying levels within it, wherein systems may be in a 

vulnerable stage of their respective adaptive cycle, caught in a poverty trap (a state of low potential, low 

connectedness and low resilience) or have become maladaptive (a state of high potential, high 

connectedness but also high resilience) and trigger destructive cascades down the successive levels. Such 

events can overcome the sustaining ability of panarchies and lead to a crisis of the CAS only to usher in a 

new order. However such transformation in a panarchy may only occur when neighboring systems in 

adjacent levels accumulate enough recombinations and inventions and are vulnerable for a switch in 

regime, all at the same time.  

 

References 

 

1. Adger, W.N. 2006. Vulnerability. Global environmental change. Vol 16.pp 268-281 

2. Adger, W.N., 2001.Scales of governance and environmental justice for adaptation and 

mitigation of climate change. Journal of International Development. Vol 13, pp.921-931.  

3. Adger, W.N., Arnell,N.W., Tompkins, E.L. 2005. Successful adaptation to climate 

change across scales. Journal of Global environmental change. Vol 15. pp. 77-86. 

4. Adger, W.N., Brown, K., Tompkins, E.L. 2006. The political economy of cross-scale 
networks in resource co-management. Ecology and society. Vol 10(2):9. 

5. Adger, W.N. Social vulnerability to climate change and extremes in coastal Vietnam. 
World Development. Vol 27 (2). Pp 249-269. 

6. Adger, W.N., Eakin, H., Winkels, A. 2009. Nested and teleconnected vulnerabilities to 

environmental change. Front ecol environ. Vol 7(3).pp 150-157. 

7.  Allen, C.R., Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. 2010. Commentary on part one articles. 

In Gunderson, L.H., Allen, C.R. and Holling, C.S. Foundations of ecological resilience. 

Washington D.C.: Island Press. 

8. Alwang, J., Siegel, P.B., Jorgensen, S.L. 2001. Vulnerability: a view from different 

disciplines. Social protection discussion paper series, Human Development Network, 

World Bank. 

9. Bayer, J.L., Vari, A and Thompson, M. 2006. Floods and fairness in Hungary. .  The case 

of clumsiness. In Verweij and Thompson (eds.). Clumpsy solutions for a complex world, 

governance, politics and plural perceptions. New York: Palgrave macmillan 

10. Belliveau, S., Smit, B and Bradshaw, B., 2006. Multiple exposures and dynamic 

vulnerability: evidence from the grape industry in Okangan valley, Canada. Global 

environmental change. Vol 16. pp 364- 378. 

11. Birkmann, J (eds). 2006. Measuring Vulnerability to natural hazards: towards disasters 

resilient societies. United Nations University Press, Japan and Teri Press, India. 



28 

 

12. Carpenter, S.R., Brock, W.A., Ludwig, D. 2002. Collapse, learning and renewal. In 

Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). Panarchy, understanding transformations in 

human and natural systems. Washington D.C.: Island press 

13. Cash, D.W. and Moser, S.C., 2000. Linking global and local scales: designing dynamic 
assessment and management processes. Global environmental change. Vol 10. pp 109-

120 

14. Cash, D.W., Adger, W.N., Berkes, F., Garden, P., Lebel, L., Olsson, P., Pritchard, L. and 
Young, O. 2006. Scale and cross-scale dynamics: governance and information in a 

multilevel world. Ecology and society. Vol 11(2):8 

15. Checkland, P. 1985. From optimizing to learning: a development of systems thinking for 

the 1990s. J. Opl Res.Soc. Vol 36(9). pp 757-767. 

16. Checkland, P. and Scholes, J. 1990. Soft systems methodology in action. West Sussex, 

England: John Wiley and sons. 

17. Dalgaard, T., Hutchings, N.J. and Porter, J.R. 2003. Agroecology, scaling 

interdisciplinarity. Agriculture, ecosystems and environment. Vol 100. pp. 39-51. 

18. Das, P.J. (2004). Rainfall Regime of Northeast India: A Hydrometeorological Study with 

Special Emphasis on the Brahmaputra Basin. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis. Gauhati 

University 

19. Das, P.J. (2009). Water and climate induced vulnerability in northeast India: Concerns for 

environmental security and sustainability. WATCH Research Report 1. AARANYAK. 

Guwahati, Assam, India. 

20. Das, P.J., Dadul Chutiya, and Nirupam Hazarika. 2009. Adjusting to Floods on the 
Brahmaputra Plains, Assam, India. Aranayak, Assam. Published by International centre 

for intgrated mountain development.Nepal. 

21. Eakin , H and Luers, A.L. 2006. Assessing the vulnerability of socio-ecological systems. 
Annual Review of Environmental resources. Vol 31. pp 365-394. 

22. Eakin, H., Winkels, A. and Sendzimir, J. 2008. Nested vulnerability: exploring cross-

scale linkages and vulnerability teleconnections in Mexican and Vietnamese coffee 

systems. Environmental Science and Policy. 

23. Fekete, A., Damm, M. and Birkmann, J. 2009.  Natural Hazards. Journal of the 

International Society for the prevention and mitigation of natural hazards. 

24. Fussel, H.M. 2005. Vulnerability in climate change research: a comprehensive conceptual 

framework. UC Berkeley: University of California International and Area Studies, UC 

Berkeley. 

25. Gibson, C.C., Ostrom, E., Ahn, T.K. 2000. The concept of scale and human dimensions 

of global change: a survey. Ecological Economics. Vol 32. pp 217-239 

26. Gohain, 2008. Big dams, big floods: on predatory development. Economic and Political 
weekly. 



29 

 

27. Gunderson, L.H. and Allen, C.R. 2010. Why resilience? Why now? In Gunderson, L.H., 

Allen, C.R. and Holling, C.S. Foundations of ecological resilience. Washington D.C.: 

Island Press. 

28. Holling, 1996 (reprinted 2010). Engineering resilience versus ecological resilience. In 

Gunderson, L.H., Allen, C.R. and Holling, C.S. Foundations of ecological resilience. 

Washington D.C.: Island Press. 

29. Holling, C.S. and Gunderson, L.H., 2002. Resilience and adaptive cycles. In Gunderson, 

L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). Panarchy, understanding transformations in human and 

natural systems. Washington D.C.: Island press 

30. Holling, C.S., 2002. What barriers? What bridges? In Gunderson LH, Holling CS, Light 

SS, (eds). Barriers and bridges to the renewal of ecosystems and institutions. New York: 

Columbia University Press 

31. Holling, C.S., Gunderson, L.H. and Peterson, 2002. Sustainability and panarchies. In 

Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). Panarchy, understanding transformations in 

human and natural systems. Washington D.C.: Island press 

32. IPCC, 2007: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 

and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of 

the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. 

Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press, 

Cambridge, UK, 7-22 

33. Janssen, M.A., 2002. A future of surprises. In Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). 

Panarchy, understanding transformations in human and natural systems. Washington 

D.C.: Island press 

34. Jones, K.T. 1998. Scale as epistemology. Political geography. Vol 17 (1). pp 25-28 
35. Leichenko, R.M. and Obrien, K.L. 2001. The dynamics of rural vulnerability to global 

change: the case of southern Africa. Mitigation and adaptation strategies for global 

change. Vol 7.pp 1-18 

36. Lukes, S., 1973. Power: A Radical View. Macmillan, London. 

37. Marston, S.A. 2000. The social construction of scale. Progress in human geography. Vol 
24(2). pp 219-242 

38. O‟Brien, K.L., Sygna, L. and Haugen, J.E. 2004. Vulnerable or resilient? A multi-scale 

assessment of climate impacts and vulnerability in Norway. Climatic Change. Vol 64. 

39. Obrien, K., Leichenko, R., Kelkar, U., Venema, H., Aandahl, G., Tompkins, H., Javed, 

A., Bhadwal, S., Barg, S., Nygaard, L., West, J. 2004. Mapping vulnerability to multiple 

stressors: climate change and globalization in India. Global environmental change. Vol 

14.pp 303-313. 



30 

 

40. Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing commons. Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University 

Press 

41. Ostrom, E. 2007. A diagnostic approach for going beyond panacea. PNAS. Vol 104(39). 
pp 15181-15187 

42. Ostrom, E., 2010. A multi-scale approach to coping with climate change and other 
collective action problems. Solutions. pp 27-36 

43. Patt, A., Klein, R.J.T. 2005. Taking the uncertainty in climate-change vulnerability 

assessment seriously. C.R. Geoscience. Vol 337, pp 411- 424 

44. Peterson, G.D., 2000. Political ecology and ecological resilience: an integration of human 

and ecological dynamics. Ecological Economics. Vol 35. pp 323-336. 

45. Peterson, G.D., 2000. Scaling ecological dynamics: self-organization hierarchical 

structure and ecological resilience. Climate change 44, pp. 359-367. 

46. Petrosillo, I., Zaccarelli, N., Zurlini, G. 2010. Multi-scale vulnerability of natural capital 

in a panarchy of socio-ecological landscapes. Ecological complexity. Vol 7. pp 359-367. 

47. Phukan, S.K., 2001. The study of hodonomy. Assam Sahitya Sabha ,Jorhat. pp 39-44. 
48. Phukan, S.K., 2010. Onomastics Assam, Vol III.pp 28-29. Guwahati. Assam:Students 

stores 

49. Pritchard, L.j. and Sanderson, S.E., 2002. The dynamics of political discourse in seeking 

sustainability. In Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). Panarchy, understanding 

transformations in human and natural systems. Washington D.C.: Island press 

50. Root, T.L. and Schneider, S.H., 1995. Ecology and climate: research strategies and 
implications. American association for advancement of science. Vol 269 (5222). pp 334-

341. 

51. Schreurs, M.A. 2008. From the bottom up: local and subnational climate change politics. 
Journal of environment and development. Vol 17 (4). pp 343-355 

52. Smit, B. and Wandel, J. 2006. Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. Global 

Environmental Change. Vol 16, pp 282-292. 

53. Stephen, L. 2004. In Bankoff, G., Frerks, G., and Hilhorst, D (eds). Mapping 

Vulnerability. Disasters, development and people. Earthscan.London 

54. Turner II, B.L., Kasperson, R.E., Matson, P.A., McCarthy, J.J., Corell, R.W., 

Christensen, L., Eckley, N., Kasperson, J.X., Luers, A., Martelo, M.L., Polsky, C., 

Pulsipher, A., Schiller, A. 2003a. A framework for vulnerability analysis in sustainability 

science. PNAS. Vol 100(14).pp 8074-8079 

55. Turner II, B.L., Matson, P.A., McCarthy, J.J., Corell, R.W., Christensen, L., Eckley, N., 

Hovelsrud-broda, G.K.,  Kasperson, J.X., Kasperson, R.E., Luers, A., Martelo, M.L., 

Mathiesen, S., Naylor, R., Polsky, C., Pulsipher, A.,  Andrew, S., Selin, H., Tyler, N. 

2003b. Illustrating the coupled human-environment system: three case studies. PNAS. 

Vol 100(14).pp 8080-8035 



31 

 

56. van Aalst, M.K., Cannon, T and Burton, I. 2008. Community level adaptation to climate 

change: the potential role of participatory community risk assessment. Global 

environmental change. Vol 18.pp 165-179 

57. Vennix. J.A.M., 1996. Group model building, facilitating team learning using systems 

dynamics. New York: John wiley and sons 

58. Verweij, M., Douglas, M., Ellis, R., Engel, F.H., Lohmann, S., Ney, S., Rayner, S. and 

Thompson, M. 2006.  The case of clumsiness. In Verweij and Thompson (eds.). Clumpsy 

solutions for a complex world, governance, politics and plural perceptions. New York: 

Palgrave macmillan 

59. Waldrop, M.M. 1992. Chapter 5: Master of the game. In Waldrop, M.M. Complexity. 

New York: Touchstone book published by Simon and Schuster 

60.  Waldrop, M.M. 1992. Chapter 8: Waiting for carnot. In Waldrop, M.M. Complexity. 

New York: Touchstone book published by Simon and Schuster 

61. Westley F. 1995. Governing design: the management of social systems and ecosystems 

management. In: Gunderson LH, Holling CS, Light SS, (eds). Barriers and bridges to the 

renewal of ecosystems and institutions. New York: Columbia University Press. 

62. Westley, F.W., Carpenter, S.R., Brock, W.A., Holling, C.S. and Gunderson, L.H. 2002. 

Why systems of people and nature are not just social and ecological systems. In 

Gunderson, L.H. and Holling, C.S. (eds.). Panarchy, understanding transformations in 

human and natural systems. Washington D.C.: Island press 

63. Whitaker JK. 1987. Alfred Marshall. In: Eatwell J, Milgate M, Newman P, editors. The 

new Palgrave: a dictionary of economics. London: MacMillan Press. 

64. Willbanks, T.J. and Kates, R.W. 1999. Global change in local places: How scale matters. 

Climatic change. Vol 43. pp 601-628. 

65.  Zermoglio, F.M.,   van Jaarsveld, A., Reid, W.V., Romm, J. Biggs, R.,  Tianxiang, Y. 
2003. Chapter 4. Multi-scale approach. In Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.  

 

 

 
                                                             
i
 The degree, duration, and/or extent in which the system is in contact with, or subject to, the perturbation (Adger, 

2006).However, exposure is often described as inseparable from the notion of sensitivity (Smit and Wandel, 2006). 
ii
 The degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli (McCarthy et 

al.,2001). 
iii

 The ability of a system to adjust to climate change, including climate variability and extremes, to moderate 

potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences(McCarthy et al., 2001). 
iv
 As found in Ahom buranjis 

v
 Observation made in the field through participant observation for two weeks 

vi
 Interviews and discussions with Dr Sarat Kumar Phukan, author of Onomastics Assam and The study of 

Hodonomy 



32 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                    
vii

 Information gathered from Agriculture Sub-division Office, Dhakuakhana Sub division, Lakhimpur district, 

Assam  
viii

 From news paper articles in TIMES OF INDIA, Guwahati edition in the month of July, 2010 


